# 2023-04-16

Another sleepless night.

I pondered what numbers would make most sense in preparation of a paper
prototype. The number of combinations of N cards can be computed by N!
(faculty of N). With ten cards as in Grow Cube this makes for a huge number.
Now if I want to enable people to remix worlds themselves this isn't feasible.
Therefore I need less cards.

* 1! = 1 (too few)
* 2! = 2 (too few)
* 3! = 6 (too few)
* 4! = 24 (this sounds about right)
* 5! = 120 (too many)

So I will limit myself to four possible cards to choose from.
This will mean I can't play cards against each other as originally thought.

In consequence I should limit the number of possible endings. 3 sounds good.
3 out of 24 makes 1/8, or 12.5% of successful strategies (roughly speaking).

Another dimension I was wondering is the number of tiles for a face of the
cube. I have three faces that need design.

* 1 square per face = 3 squares overall (too few)
* 4 squares per face = 12 squares overall (too few)
* 9 squares per face = 27 squares overall (too few)
* 16 squares per face = 48 squares overall (manageable)
* 25 squares per face = 75 squares overall (too much?)

So I will update my plan from originally 100 squares per face to a smaller
number.

As result I expect the game too have a faster pace. That aligns with the
casual gameplay I'm after. I might need to loose the number of players from
3 to 2. I'm not sure yet.

Now if I think about how to describe the world as a data structure I want
to have a compact version that can be shared (as mail, toot, message, tweet,
IPFS content, BlueTooth message, you name it). If I limit the colour palette to
four colours, I can use two bits per square to describe the assigned colour.
With 48 squares this makes 96 bits or 12 bytes. I can express this in 6 hex
characters!

Then there is the need for describing what happens in each combination of
characters. I could repeat the whole hex, but might also get away with
describing the diff for each face (assuming sparse changes). I have the fixed
order of top-left-right and display the squares in a well-defined order.
So all I need is the index and the new value. With 16 squares per face this
means a hex character and two bits for the new palette index.

I will think about whether I leave the exact choice of the colour palette to
the player while including a default palette in the world definition.
Each colour is expressed in CSS Hex notation (without the pound).

Speaking of world definition, I need metadata. For example, an ID and a type
to describe which method was used to generate it (e.g. nanoid for local play
or a CID (content ID) for IPFS). The method must also include a version to
allow for future compatibility.

Speaking of: it makes sense to also track the version of the world definition.
In the future I might want to change those parameters (for example after the
jam) to allow for more interesting gameplay.

Currently this will make for the following world definition format:

```txt
ID: <ID>
Type: <method:version>
Version: <world definition version, i.e. 1>
Tiles: <emoji 1><emoji 2><emoji 3><emoji 4>
Ends: <combination 1>:<combination 2>:<combination 3>
Faces: <12 bytes for top>:<12 bytes for left>:<12 bytes for right>
Combinations: <combination 0>:<top changes>:<left changes>:<right changes>,<combination 1>:<top changes>:<left changes>:<right changes>,<etc>
Colours: <colour 0>:<colour 1>:<colour 2>:<colour 3>
```

Depending on some examples, I might get rid of the keys and enforce a certain
order since all rows are mandatory.

The structure will be parsed into a JSON structure to update the state.

Speaking of state: I was wondering whether I should allow for saving and
loading. The biggest hurdle I can see here right now is the XState definition.
Loading a game without having saved on should not be possible. So can I disable
the state? Or hide it? I need to read the documentation.

I should also take a snapshot at the beginning of a game and record each turn
to have a reproducible play that can be saved. And more importantly: rewinded
to allow for forks of the gameplay (to honour the jam theme).

## Today's achievement

I achieved a lot! At least it feels this way. I have a paper prototype which
led to a first set of game mechanics to be tested. There's an alternative
proposal as well. I'm surprised that paper prototypes do work!

Also I started designing the new game scene with a set of form inputs. For now
I can update the nickname. There's already a radio for the toggle of a player
being human vs. bot, but it's not bound to the state. The form itself is
derived from the state already.

I ran into a set of memory leaks today caused by adding more tests (or rather
lack of proper cleanup). Good to have tests here! My test suite was extended
to handle spies today. That will be helpful.

## Next steps

I want to have a playable prototype online in the next few days and also record
my architectural decisions. If nobody gets sick, I can also look into recording
a video on PeerTube about the current state.

### Codewise

Bind the isBot radio to the state and prepare a world builder to have the
world definition files (see above). Then add the cards and game mechanics.
I also should include some basic styling (at the very least the layout).

### Previous in line

See journal entry from [yesterday](./2023-04-15.md).
